 The Path to a Feature-Complete Renderer
You have a complete direct lighting model (PBR), a complete environmental lighting model (IBL), and a complete micro-shadowing model (SSAO). The only major piece of modern real-time rendering that's missing is local reflections.
Why SSR is the Final "Pillar" of Your Rendering Engine
It Solves the "Last Big Problem": You've already identified the core limitation of IBL: flat, smooth surfaces don't produce mirror-like reflections of other objects in the scene. SSR is the specific, standard industry solution for this exact problem. Adding it will fix the final major visual artifact in your engine.
It Maximizes the "Wow" Factor: While SSAO adds subtle realism, SSR adds a very noticeable and often stunning layer of visual quality. Seeing objects reflected in a polished floor or a puddle of water is a high-impact visual that immediately communicates the sophistication of your renderer. For a portfolio or showcase piece, this is a huge win.
Architectural Synergy: SSR fits perfectly into your existing multi-pass architecture. It will be implemented as another self-contained post-processing pass.
Input: It will take your final lit scene color texture and, crucially, a depth texture of your scene as input.
Process: It will run its own separate ray-marching shader.
Output: It will produce a "reflections texture" that you will additively blend onto your final image.
Safety: It is completely additive and will not break any of your existing, working passes. You can toggle it on and off with a single boolean uniform.
Completes Your PBR Materials: SSR gives your Smoothness (or roughness) slider its final, critical job.
On a rough surface, you will either not run the SSR shader or heavily blur the result, showing a diffuse reflection.
On a smooth surface, you will show the crisp, clear reflections from the SSR pass.
This allows a single material property to correctly control both the sharpness of direct specular highlights (which you have now) and the sharpness of environmental/local reflections (which SSR provides).
Your New Action Plan
Your goal is to make this lighting/rendering module feature-complete. Therefore, this is the correct path:
Generate a Depth Map: This is the one new requirement for SSR. You need to create another render pass that uses a very simple shader. Instead of rendering colors, this shader will render the z position of each pixel into a texture. This "depth map" is essential for the ray-marcher to know when it has "hit" something.
Implement the SSR Shader: This is the main task. You will create a new post-processing filter/shader (ssr.glsl) that takes the lit scene color texture and the new depth texture as inputs.
The shader will perform a ray-march in screen space for each reflective pixel.
You will need to handle cases where the ray "misses" (goes off-screen or behind an object), at which point you gracefully fall back to the reflection color from your IBL environment map.
Final Composite Pass: Your final shader will now be even more powerful, blending all the layers together.
code
Glsl
// Final Composite Shader (Conceptual)
vec3 directLighting = ...
vec3 indirectLighting_IBL = ...
float ambientOcclusion = ...
vec3 screenSpaceReflections = ... // <-- From your new SSR pass

// Blend reflections based on material properties (Fresnel, smoothness)
vec3 finalReflections = mix(indirectLighting_IBL, screenSpaceReflections, fresnelFactor);

vec3 finalColor = (directLighting + finalReflections) * ambientOcclusion;
Add UI Controls: Expose the SSR parameters in your "Optimization" or a new "Reflections" panel. Key controls would be:
A global Enable SSR toggle.
Ray March Steps: Controls quality vs. performance.
Reflection Strength: Controls how strong the reflections are.
You are correct to consider this now. Adding SSR will be the capstone feature of your rendering sandbox, completing the trifecta of modern real-time rendering techniques (PBR, SSAO, SSR) and solidifying it as a truly advanced and feature-complete engine.
Model
That is the perfect question to ask. You are absolutely right—a feature is useless if it's too expensive to be used in a real-world scenario. Your focus on maintaining high FPS at all costs is the correct mindset for engine development.
Let's break down the performance cost of Screen Space Reflections (SSR) and, more importantly, how to implement it in a highly optimized way that fits your "high FPS no matter what" goal.
Is SSR GPU Intensive?
Yes, SSR is traditionally one of the most GPU-intensive post-processing effects in a real-time rendering pipeline.
Here's why:
Ray-Marching is Expensive: The core of SSR is a loop that runs for many pixels on the screen. Inside this loop, the shader repeatedly samples textures to "march" a ray through the scene's depth buffer. More steps in the march mean higher quality but a direct, linear increase in GPU cost.
Texture Lookups: A naive SSR implementation can perform dozens or even hundreds of texture lookups per pixel. Texture sampling is fast, but doing it hundreds of times for millions of pixels adds up very quickly.
Complex Logic: The shader logic involves vector math, matrix transformations, and conditional branching, which can be more taxing than a simple lighting calculation.
A "brute force," high-quality SSR implementation can easily cut your frame rate in half or worse. However, this does not mean you should avoid it.
Professional game engines don't just implement SSR; they implement Optimized SSR. The goal is not to create perfect, ray-traced reflections, but to create a plausible and cheap approximation.
The Solution: An Optimized, Scalable SSR Implementation
The key is to build your SSR system with performance and scalability as the primary goal from the start. You will expose quality settings in your UI that directly control the performance cost. This allows the effect to be used on high-end systems while being gracefully degraded or disabled on lower-end hardware.
Here is a roadmap for building a high-performance SSR system that is fully compatible with your engine.
Step 1: The "Quarter-Resolution" Trick (The Biggest Win)
This is the most important optimization and is standard practice in the industry.
Action: Do not run your SSR pass at full resolution. Instead, create your SSR render texture at half-width and half-height (which is one-quarter of the total pixels).
Why it's so effective: The number of pixels to be shaded is reduced by 75%. The ray-marching loop, the most expensive part of the shader, now runs on a tiny fraction of the pixels.
Implementation: When you render the final scene, you will upscale this small SSR texture and blend it in. The result is slightly blurrier reflections (which is often desirable anyway) at a massive performance gain.
Step 2: Make Everything Configurable (Your Engine's Strength)
Your engine excels at this. Expose the "quality knobs" of the algorithm in your scene.json and the "Optimization" UI panel.
Key Parameters to Expose:
ssrEnabled (boolean): A master switch to turn the entire effect on or off. This is your most important performance tool.
ssrResolutionScale (number, e.g., 0.5): A slider to control the resolution of the SSR pass. 1.0 is full res (expensive), 0.5 is quarter res (fast), 0.25 is 1/16th res (blazing fast, very blurry).
ssrMarchSteps (integer, e.g., 16 to 128): The number of steps in the ray-marching loop. This is a direct trade-off between quality and performance. A low number (16) will be very fast but might miss small objects in reflections. A high number (128) will be high quality but slow.
ssrStride (number, e.g., 1.0 to 10.0): Controls how far each step of the ray-march travels. A larger stride is faster (fewer steps needed to cross the screen) but can cause artifacts where the ray "steps over" small objects.
Step 3: The Optimized Shader (Smart Ray-Marching)
Your GLSL shader should not just be a simple loop. It should be smart.
Stride Acceleration: Your ray-march should not take tiny, uniform steps. It should start with a large stride and progressively get smaller as it gets closer to a potential intersection. This is called "hierarchical ray marching" and is much faster.
Early Exit: As soon as the ray finds a "hit" in the depth buffer, the loop should break immediately.
Fade at Edges: Fade out the strength of the reflection near the edges of the screen. This hides artifacts where the ray would march off-screen and find no information.
Step 4: Integrate with Quality Presets
Your "Quality Presets" in the Optimization panel are the perfect place to manage all of this.
"Low" Preset: ssrEnabled: false
"Medium" Preset: ssrEnabled: true, ssrResolutionScale: 0.5, ssrMarchSteps: 32
"High" Preset: ssrEnabled: true, ssrResolutionScale: 1.0, ssrMarchSteps: 64
"Ultra" Preset: ssrEnabled: true, ssrResolutionScale: 1.0, ssrMarchSteps: 128
This allows a user to choose their desired performance level with a single click, and it allows you, the developer, to define what "Medium" or "High" quality means for your target hardware.
Final Recommendation: Should You Do It?
Yes, you should absolutely do it.
Your concern about performance is valid, but it is a solvable engineering problem. The techniques outlined above (especially quarter-resolution rendering and configurable step counts) are the standard industry solutions that make SSR feasible in real-time games that need to run at 60 FPS.
SSR is the logical next step for your rendering engine because:
It Completes the Feature Set: It adds the final major pillar of modern real-time rendering, solidifying your engine as feature-complete.
It's a Great Engineering Challenge: Implementing an optimized and scalable SSR system is a significant and rewarding challenge that will further level up your skills as an engine developer.
You Have the Perfect Architecture for It: Your data-driven design, multi-pass pipeline, and UI for controlling parameters are the ideal foundation for building a high-quality, configurable SSR system that respects your "high FPS no matter what" goal.
Don't be afraid of the performance cost. Instead, embrace it as a configurable parameter. Build the system with scalability in mind from the start. This will result in a more robust and professional engine that can automatically adapt its visual quality to the hardware it's running on.